---
title: 5.2
description: Workshop in HfG, Schwäbisch Gmünd (GE)
published: true
date: 2022-10-21T13:12:53.416Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-06-14T11:31:20.845Z
class: projet
---

## Collaborative interaction patterns: HfG's workshop, 21-25 November 2022, Schwäbisch Gmünd (GE)

Do the tools we use take on a different form when we create as a group
of people on the computer?

Personal computers were originally designed for individual use, with
established human-machine interfaces like the mouse or keyboard. These
interfaces, represented on the screen as mouse pointers or text cursors,
have undergone gradual changes over the past 50 years. However, with the
rise of web-based tools, we now have the ability to collaboratively edit
documents in real-time with others. Tools such as Figma, Miro, or Google
Docs display the presence of team members on the screen, but is this the
ultimate culmination of development? What other input patterns could be
possible and useful?

To explore these possibilities, Marc Guntow, an HfG teacher, organized
the workshop "Collaborative Interaction Patterns," inviting students to
investigate input patterns in team situations and visualize their ideas
through prototypes and simulations.

### Marc Guntow's Talks

During the first days of the week, each working session started with an
introductive talk by Marc Guntow who is leading the workshop

![IMG_4979](img/IMG_4979.JPG)

![IMG_4985](img/IMG_4985.JPG)

![IMG_4986](img/IMG_4986.JPG)
<figcaption>Marc present the workshop</figcaption>

## Teamwork

The teams were formed during the first day, according to affinities
between students and teamwork began immediately, in order to prepare
Friday\'s presentation. Marc Guntow\'s talks listed below, introduced
each step of the work.

![IMG_5073](img/IMG_5073.JPG)

![IMG_5073](img/IMG_5103.JPG)

![IMG_5073](img/IMG_5109.JPG)

![IMG_5073](img/IMG_5111.JPG)

![IMG_5073](img/IMG_5121.JPG)
<figcaption>Teamwork</figcaption>

## Projects made by students

#### Authentic emotion capture in digital collaborative working spaces
##### Andy Parker, Nicole Krein, Kaisa Uik

![IMG_5318](img/IMG_5318.JPG)

#### What is this tool for?

In the digital collaboration era people tend to lack emotional
connection in the workspace. They are working with computers rather the
people using them. This tool makes it easier for co-workers to create
emotional connections, it helps start conversations both about work and
personal life and it lets you see authentic feedback of your work.

#### How does it work?

When you are viewing your co-worker\'s frame, motion capture system
starts detecting your facial expressions. When you have a distinctive
reaction, a picture is taken of you and posted in the frames corner. You
can add a comment to explain your reaction or make a face with a
stronger emotion to change it. You cannot delete your own reaction, but
others can.

#### What did we make?

Within four days we made a Figma file with different components that
could be added to Miro or Figjam. We also recorded a video with three
scenarios of the ways the tool could be used after drawing storyboards.
In the end we made an explaining poster with pictures of scenarios.

#### What type of collaboration is it for (sychroneous/asynchroneous, collaborative/cooperative/participative)?

This is made as a new feature for digital collaboration tools like Miro
and FigJam.

#### How does it impacts the collaboration?

Digital collaboration is often very serious, and it lacks emotional
connection. With our solution people would give insight into their mood
and working spaces. By making the workspace more intimate by creating an
emotional connection between people. It also makes it less formal and
more fun so people would feel less anxious and alone while working from
distance.

#### How did we came up with this idea?

At first, we came up with a few ideas which would be interesting to work
with concerning digital collaboration and cursor qualities. We thought
about gamification, making the workspace less formal and more
connecting. We then defined the problem we see in digital workspaces --
that people lack emotional connection that they usually have because
they see face to face. We then started brainstorming about different
ideas and stuck with the one where a picture is taken of you
automatically to ensure authenticity.

![316219945_678061723705739_471300925609566843_n.jpg](img/316219945_678061723705739_471300925609566843_n.jpg)
<figcaption>Authentic Emotion Capture researchs</figcaption>

#### What other existing tools could it be compared to and why is it different?

The solution can be compared to the stickers feature because they also
show what the other person is feeling. However, with our solution, the
reactions are real and authentic, they cannot be faked. In contrast,
while using the stickers, one can choose any reaction, even if they
don\'t feel genuinely that way. Seeing people\'s faces also makes you
more familiar with them, creating a more comfortable working
environment.

![315286821_3763737547106197_6270115798868873893_n.jpg](img/315286821_3763737547106197_6270115798868873893_n.jpg)
<figcaption>Authentic Emotion Capture final presentation</figcaption>

#### FaceCursor
##### Vadim Drobot, Julien Dzviga, Hugo Guyomard

![IMG_5369](img/IMG_5369.JPG)
<figcaption>FaceCursor final presentation</figcaption>

#### What is this tool for?

FaceCursor is a short program that comes with a simulation of an
interface, incorporating a webcam into the mouse clicker. This tool has
the potential to reinvent the concept of video content by introducing
live elements, for example. Furthermore, it could serve as an add-on to
integrate into our operating systems, allowing us to move away from
simple video chat software and embrace a hybrid solution between
TeamViewer and Facetime (or the good old Skype).

#### What type of collaboration is it for (sychroneous/asynchroneous, collaborative/cooperative/participative)?

This tool is clearly designed for synchronous collaboration, distinct
from a simple *emoji* or *thumbs up* discussion. It has the
potential to be cooperative as well, with the inclusion of additional
features such as drag-and-drop or clipboard actions that involve
simultaneous user clicking. Currently, users have the ability to draw
directly on their *mouseelf*, extending the functionality of a paint
program to include live webcam capabilities.

#### How does it impacts the collaboration?

FaceCursor clearly doesn't claim to be a huge innovation, but rather a
*cool* blending of several existing tools brought together.

#### How did we came up with this idea?

The inspiration for this project came from our frequent use of Snap or
Instagram filters, but also with this ability to move your face anywhere
on the screen, when you are in a Facetime or Messenger call on a
smartphone (or similar device).  

#### What other existing tools could it be compared to and why is it different?

The difference with an overknown tool like Miro or Figma is the add of the mouse pointer with live camera on integrated, and the ability to get a "real human" interaction with it.

#### Autonomous mouse pointer
##### Nicole Krein, Héloïse Debrand, Ludovic Hohl

#### What if your mouse pointers were retired?

Thanks to the Leap Motion Controller, there is no longer a need for mice
or even mouse pointers, so they are now retired and living their best
life as autonomous pointers. Let\'s see what this one is busy doing in
the background.

![IMG_5352](img/IMG_5352.JPG)
<figcaption>Autonomous mouse pointer final presentation</figcaption>

## Conclusion and openings

This week was productive in terms of discussions, experiences, and
design. Students modeled numerous tools and explored a wide variety of
intentions that aim to discover new ways of interacting with each other.
We witnessed moments of skills and tool sharing among team members,
which was particularly interesting as it blurred the boundaries between
our school's pedagogies. The exchange between students allowed for a
porous integration of different educational approaches.

During this third and final workshop week, the teachers also had the
opportunity to discuss how to showcase all the work that had been done.
We considered different formats for disseminating the work and
ultimately decided on an exhibition in each school, with similar
content. This would involve video interviews with the students who
participated in the workshops, all answering the same set of questions
that we collectively wrote. Throughout the workshop, we received
informal feedback from the students, as they were the ones most directly
involved in the collaborative work. Recognizing the importance of their
perspectives and experiences, we felt it was essential to give their
testimonies and reflections on the subject of digital collaboration a
prominent place.
